DTRACE.md, before:


Supported DTrace Language Features
==================================

MCTrace uses the DTrace language as the means for expressing how it
should modify its input binary. While MCTrace does not implement all of
the DTrace language, the following core DTrace language features are
supported:

* Probe descriptions and probe syntax
* Probe name pattern-matching. Supported metacharacters are `*`, `?`,
  `[...]`, and `\`.
* Global variables
* Constants with suffixes `u`, `U`, `l`, `L`, `ul`, `UL`, `ll`, `LL`,
  `ull`, and `ULL`
* Data types:
  * `int`
  * `char`
  * `short`
  * `long`
  * `long long`
* Arithmetic operators `+`, `-`, and `*` supported on integer types only
* Builtins:
  * `int arg0`
  * `timestamp`
  * `long ucaller`

Example DTrace probe scripts demonstrating MCTrace's features can be
found in `mctrace/tests/eval/` in the MCTrace GitHub repository.

MCTrace-specific DTrace extensions
----------------------------------

In addition to the core language features listed above, MCTrace's
support for DTrace includes the following additional features:

* A `send(int channel_id)` action for telemetry exfiltration (see
  `MCTRACE.md` for details)
* A `copyint32(int addr)` subroutine for copying 32-bit values from
  memory

Commit message:

Minor clarifying edits to release documentation.

DTRACE.md, after:


Supported DTrace Language Features
==================================

MCTrace uses the DTrace language as the means for expressing how it
should modify its input binary. While MCTrace does not implement all of
the DTrace language, the following core DTrace language features are
supported:

* Probe descriptions and probe syntax
* Probe name pattern-matching. Supported metacharacters are `*`, `?`,
  `[...]`, and `\`.
* Global variables
* Constants with suffixes `u`, `U`, `l`, `L`, `ul`, `UL`, `ll`, `LL`,
  `ull`, and `ULL`
* Data types:
  * `int`
  * `char`
  * `short`
  * `long`
  * `long long`
* Arithmetic operators `+`, `-`, and `*` supported on integer types only
* Builtins:
  * `int arg0`
  * `timestamp`
  * `long ucaller`

Example DTrace probe scripts demonstrating MCTrace's features can be
found in `mctrace/tests/eval/` in the MCTrace GitHub repository, as well
as in the `examples` directory in the release Docker image.

MCTrace-specific DTrace extensions
----------------------------------

In addition to the core language features listed above, MCTrace's
support for DTrace includes the following additional features:

* A `send(int channel_id)` action for telemetry exfiltration (see
  `MCTRACE.md` for details)
* A `copyint32(int addr)` subroutine for copying 32-bit values from
  memory
